#- playtester guide

i was looking through old files on my computer and came across this one. a small playtester guide i wrote to have people help me playtest "picodex dual".

here is what it looked like:

## playtester guide

the things i'm looking for a playtest:
* pokemon names must be 8 letters. items must be 6. moves must be 6. let me know if any of the names i came up with is way off and if you have a better short name for that pokemon/item/move.
* if the game crashes, could you screenshot it? i can decode the error message. and try to tell me how to reproduce it.
* if any of the trainers are too hard, let me know. (besides horde mode, that is supposed to be hard.)
* my sprites are still in progress and some are not complete yet, but you can still let me know if you have suggestions to improve some sprites.

and of course any other feedback you have.

### playtester secrets

i don't plan on releasing this information with the game. so you get to hear some secrets:

when you select a pokemon for your team, there is a 1/8192 chance that your pokemon is shiny.

when a battle starts, each pokemon has a 1/16384 chance to have pokerus.
* pokerus works slightly different than in the og games.
* it gives you +1 atk/def/sat/sdf/spd as long as you have pokerus.
* it also functions as a major status condition, so you are protected from other status conditions unless you use a self-inflicting status condition move (eg: rest).

i think horde mode is possible to beat. i have ideas, though i haven't tried them. if you beat horde mode, you unlock missingno.
* missingno combines the movesets of a few related glitch pokemon from rby, as well as the best stats of missingno from each of those games. making missingno one of the most powerful pokemon.
* missingno is the only pokemon that naturally learns 2 moves (can learn 2 waterguns).
* when missingno is unlocked, a glitch move tm05 is also unlocked. this is a glitch move from rby that increases the user's evasion stat by 2.
