# 2019-06-30
I survived most of college and eventually earned my Computer Science degree with an ASUS x205ta netbook. This computer has been reliable with me and served me well throughout the past 4 years. When I first bought the computer in 2015, I was mainly looking for something cheap with a good battery life. The main specs taken from the ASUS website are:
* Quad core 1.33 GHz Processor
* 2 GB RAM
* 32 GB eMMC Storage
* 1366x768 px Display 

=> https://www.asus.com/us/Laptops/ASUS_EeeBook_X205TA/

Reviews online for this computer were mostly [very
good](https://www.laptopmag.com/reviews/laptops/asus-eeebook-x205ta), compared
to other netbooks, so I felt very confident about my decision to make the
purchase.

I loved the look and feel of my computer as soon as I received it. But to make
it usable I had to immediately replace Windows with
[Linux](https://www.archlinux.org/). I was able to get through the tricky
32-bit EFI installation, but ASUS proprietary drivers left my computer with
many problems including:
- The speaker, microphone, and headphone jack didn't work.
- Most of the Fn keys didn't work.
- The multi-touch features for the trackpad were buggy.
- Bluetooth didn't work.
- The computer couldn't hibernate.
- And random freezes occured after extended use.

I didn't give up on my brave little netbook though! After 2 years, the Linux
community was able to solve most of the x205ta problems listed above. The main
problem remaining was that the audio still didn't work. I temporarilly solved
this by always using an external USB audio jack with headphones. Eventually
audio did make progress in a historic x205ta [bugzilla
thread](https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=95681) and [Ubuntu forum
post](https://ubuntuforums.org/showthread.php?t=2254322&page=125&p=13591881#post13591881).
Today, every driver issue has been fixed and integrated into modern kernel
builds. My only contribution to the x205ta Linux movement was a few edits on
the [Arch x205ta Wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/ASUS_x205ta)
though.

Now it's been four years. I've been through a lot with this netbook and it will
be hard to part with it. That aside, it will have to be done. I'm ready for
something new. I will have to say goodbye to the familiar and embrace the
unfamiliar.

Or I could just buy the [newer
model](https://www.asus.com/us/Laptops/ASUS-Laptop-E203MA/) of it with improved
specs :D.
