---
layout: post
title:  The Illiad, Shurrupak, and Virtue Theory.
tags: [homer, philosophy]
caption: You should not steal anything.
modified: 2019-12-14
---
It's the weekend and I had some time with myself today, so I decided to just
research things. Today I read the first 2 books of "The Illiad", along with
small translations of some of the [earliest known written texts of
mankind](https://www.history.com/news/what-is-the-oldest-known-piece-of-literature):
"The Kesh Temple Hymn" and "The Instructions of Shuruppak". Afterwards, I
watched a Crash Course video on "[The Epic of
Gilgamesh](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sWppk7-Mti4)". Followed by moral
theory Crash Course videos, concluding with Aristotle's "Virtue Theory". I'll
share and relate my study, hoping that you as the reader may be able to benefit
from it.

Starting with "[The Illiad](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Iliad)",
this story takes place towards the end of the Trojan war. Achilles and
Agamemnon are two very important figures on the Greek side of the war. Achilles
is regarded as the strongest soldier, while Agamemnon is King and therefore the
most powerful person overall. Achilles stands up to Agamemnon and as a result
Agamemnon takes Achilles' concubine for himself. To me, it seems like this is
done partly out of greed and also revenge. Achilles rants to his goddess mom
Thetis, telling her to ask Jupiter to let the Greeks suffer at the hand of the
Trojans, so that the Greeks, most notably Agamemnon, will realize how much they
actually need Achilles' help. His mom does end up asking Jupiter and Jupiter
hesitantly agrees. Jupiter is hesitant, because his wife Juno thinks he is
already siding with the Trojans, even though he is really trying to take a
neutral stance. It seems like Jupiter had a difficult job, because he had to
try to satisfy the opinions and views of many different Gods.

In the Wikipedia article on the Illiad, it mentions the topic of Bicameralism.
According to the article, Bicameralism states that humans at this earlier time
period lacked a concious and that most of the actions in the Illiad were
influenced by a God. I feel like the act of Achilles telling his mom to talk to
Zeus would be one of the exceptions to that last assertion. Though my claim
could be under fallacy of mistranslation of the version of the Illiad I am
reading, Achilles' wishful revenge does seems to have a major part in the
story, so I'm guessing it is not a mistranslation, I would need more research
back this up though.

In order to fulfil his promise, Jupiter sent a dream to Agamemnon saying the
Greeks should seize Troy, Jupiter knowing it would not go very well for the
Greeks. I thought it was very interesting and different to see the degree of
obedience in which the provincial kings were loyal to a seemingly irrational
Agamemnon. Especially Nestor and Ulysses, some of the most rational characters
in the story thus far, were extremely loyal to Agamemnon, to the point of
correcting rebellious soldiers (e.g. Thersitus).

That was my extent of reading the Illiad today. The Illiad is one of the
earliest epics in human history, but the [Epic of
Gilgamesh](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Iliad) definitely
predates it by a significant amount of time. Though Gilgamesh predates the
Illiad, it has not been relevant to much of Western civilization, because of
the fact that it wasn't available until more recent archaeological finds.
Though even if it was available before the mid 1800s, Hellenistic and Roman
culture has seemed to overshadow much of other ancient cultures during the
progress of Western civilization.

"[The Instructions of
Shuruppak](http://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/section5/tr561.htm)" is a very short
and interesting read. It is a short text, in which a man named "Curuppag" is
giving moral advice, or wisdom, to his son "Zi-ud-sura". I could have the wrong
understanding, but I get the impression that the "Bicameralism" I mentioned
earlier doesn't apply to this text, and this text marginally predates the
Illiad. Some of the moral suggestions include:

- Don't have sex with a slave girl, prostitute, or another man's wife.
- "A loving heart maintains a family; a hateful heart destroys a family."
- Be careful about your actions when you are drunk.
- Don't travel at night.
- Be submissive to people with more authority than you.

"[The Kesh Temple Hymn](http://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/section5/tr561.htm)" on
the other hand was more bland. It mentions 8 (or 9) buildings/temples/houses
that could be part of a new town. Each house is described to be pretty
magnificent, relating to the glory of some specific Gods, especially "Akgi",
"Nintud" and "Kec".

I finished my study with some moral philosophy overview. Watching from Crash
Course is by no means a primary source (Wikipedia isn't either), but I can
relay my interpretation of each moral theory here:

- Divine Command Theory: Morality comes from supernatural being(s).
- Natural Law Theory: Aquinas says God made us with morals, we just need to
  keep them.
- Kant's Theory: Never break your morals, even if it seems like breaking them
  would be the correct decision.
- Utilitarianism: Do the most good for the most people.
- Contractarianism: Morals only come from society/government, because it is
  generally beneficial to humans.
- [Virtue Theory](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PrvtOWEXDIQ): There are
  really good people who understand how to be human. Try to be a good person
  and try to become one of those people.

Virtue theory was the last in the unit, and it also resonates the most with me.
Maybe coming from a Christian background, thinking Jesus Christ is one of those
virtuous people I want to try to emulate. Or maybe because virtue theory is a
Greek idea and my study today focused on a Greek epic. I wonder if the
Mesopotamians had a similar concept with "Virtue Theory". The Bicameralism view
would probably argue no, but "The Instructions of Shurrupak" do show that
wisdom was passed down to later generations even at a very early stage in
recorded history. Also the character of Nestor and Ulysses in the Illiad seem
to resonate with a sense of this virtue, because they seem to be mature enough
to deal with problems and please different parties.

Well, I've tied up my studies for today. Hopefully you found this useful. I'll
try to make more posts like this in the future, whether it is about
Philosophy/Great Books, or about something more technical. While I'm sharing
knowledge with the world, I am also reinforcing my own learning, so that's a
plus! Hope you enjoyed this :).
