
# Alan Morgan
Boise, ID, US

## CONTACT
=> https://github.com/alanxoc3
=> https://www.linkedin.com/in/alanxoc3
=> https://www.lexaloffle.com/bbs/?uid=17205
=> https://twitter.com/alanxoc3
=> https://facebook.com/alamorg3
=> https://youtube.com/alanxoc3
=> https://alanxoc3.itch.io/
=> https://patreon.com/alanxoc3
=> https://ko-fi.com/alanxoc3

## RELEVANT EDUCATION
BYU Idaho, Rexburg ID — B. S. Computer Science
December 2018 | 3.7 GPA in CS Courses.
- Machine Learning, Computer Architecture, Discrete Math...

## RELEVANT WORK EXPERIENCE
Clearwater Analytics, Boise ID — Software Developer
July 2019 - May 2021
- Mostly backend developer.
- GCP migration.

Clearwater Analytics, Boise ID — Software Developer Intern
July 2018 - September 2018
- Created an interface that allows analysts to fix 3rd party client data.
- React + Typescript application that contacts RESTful Java endpoints.
- Frontend React + Typescript dev.

Clearwater Analytics, Boise ID — Software Developer
May 2017 - August 2017
- Agile environment. Worked with clients to figure out their needs.
- Completed two Angular 4 + Java projects now used in production.
- Frontend Angular + Typescript dev.

BYU Idaho, Rexburg ID — Computer Science Tutor & TA
September 2015 - April 2018
- Tutored C++ Procedural, OO, Algorithm, and Data Structures classes.
- Graded for Computational Theory, an advanced CS course.

## RELEVANT PERSONAL PROJECTS
Bity-8 | 300+ hours | 3 People | Rust
github.com/bity-8/bity-8
Yet Another Fantasy Console! Limits cartridge size to only 256 KB, thus allowing programmers to make creative games!

Concards | 120+ hours | Just Me | Golang (was C++)
github.com/alanxoc3/concards
Flashcard CLI application! Uses spaced repetition and has tons of features. Please check out the Github page for a much better introduction.

Sock Tron | 40+ hours | 2 People | VueJS front-end, Python back-end
github.com/QuadeMorrison/sock-tron
Not just any tron game. This allows for up to 30 people to play in a single match from different computers. It's was running on my server.

Many PICO-8  simulations and games | 300+ hours | Just Me | Lua
lexaloffle.com/bbs/?uid=17205&mode=carts
github.com/alanxoc3/pico-8-work
PICO-8 is a great platforms for developers to share ideas, improve their skills, and have fun coding! Try playing some of my games at the link!


THINGS I AM GOOD WITH
Nginx, Webpack, Linux
Git, SVN, Typescript, React
Material Design
Jira, Fisheye, Jenkins
Vim & Emacs

PROFICIENT LANGUAGES
Python, Javascript, C, C++
Lua, Rust, Go, Elisp

ACHIEVEMENTS
5 Semester ACM Leadership
2 Semester Code Space Chair
1 Semester Pico-8 Club Chair
Graduated CTEC Java School
Taught English in China :)
2 Year Religious Volunteer
50,000+ XP on Duolingo

OTHER INTERESTS
Arch Linux, Great Books,
Mandarin, Esperanto,
Fencing, Running,
Piano, Outdoors,

